---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Big Data is Everywhere
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2019-11-22
labels:
  - Big Data
  - Sports
  - Education
---

As Black Friday is now in the past, stores across the country just took in an absurd amount of data. But what is this data? A lot of people would describe this as big data. But what is big data actually? According to Oracle, big data is described as “data that contains greater variety arriving in increasing volumes and with ever-higher velocity” 
(Oracle.com, WP). But this definition does not only apply to Black Friday. Every single day, companies are tracking every click on their website, every item bought in a store, is all being registered and stored as data to be analyzed. But what makes all this data different than regular data? In Oracle’s article on big data, it is described as “larger, more complex data sets, especially from new data sources. These data sets are so voluminous that traditional data processing software just can’t manage them” (Oracle.com, WP). But what are the uses of big data? It is not just limited to businesses and stores, but it has practical use in other industries like sports and education.

### In Sports
Every home run, every touchdown, every basket scored is a data point. The sporting industry is one of many that takes advantage of big data. While it might seem obvious that they have a ton of data on their players and others, another way that sports teams might use big data is for the consumers. According to an article done by Forbes there are many teams that are tracking data of the people inside the stadiums. For example, the article says “The New England Patriots track data ranging from what fans buy at the pro shop to when they buy tickets. By crunching those numbers with the help of the Kraft Analytics Group, they can predict everything from ticket pricing to staffing on game day” (Ricky, WP). This shows that by using big data, it can help teams be prepared ahead of time and help they save money by not overstaffing or oversupplying concessions. Another example of where big data is being used in sports can be seen in the Olympics. According to an article by Ryan Ayers, with training being the athletes full time job, they look for any way possible to give them an advantage. This includes using data to figure out what makes the top athletes be able to compete at the level they do (Ayers, WP). What this shows is that even being an athlete, that being able to take in data and analyze it is an important part of the job. Everyone benefits from big data, not just businesses. But how can big data expand its role in sports? In an article done by Forbes, Abhas Ricky writes, “The use of analytics in the sports industry will only increase as the deluge of data increases. Thanks to wearable devices, tagged equipment and video tracking, a game can generate more than a million data points. And that's just on the field” (Ricky, WP). The way that technology is evolving with just increase the impact of big data on sports and their will be more way to collect data. In turn this data might lead to better player safety, stadium security, and most importantly a better overall experience in sports. But the sporting industry is just one of many industries using big data, another being the education industry.

###In Education
Education is a huge part of life. People spend years going to school, doing homework, taking tests, and doing projects. Every test answer is a data point. Every missed homework question is a data point. With big data, it allows for schools to use information on missed test questions and personalize the learning towards the students. In an article by Ryan Ayers, he talks about a similar topic about how teachers no longer have to wait for standardized tests to show student struggles and can instead discover the problem earlier and use different teaching methods to help struggling students keep up with the rest of the class (Ayers, WP). But this mean that teachers and professors are going to need to understand this data and know what to do with it to personalize the learning experience (Ayers, WP). This is yet another example of how other people, not just big data analysts or scientists will need to understand big data. A different way that big data is used in education comes in the form of Learning Management Systems. According to an article Lori Jones, “the Learning Management System allows the instructors to create assignments and tests using the information that is already online using automation” (Jones, WP). This is an example of not only teachers using big data, but it shows how big data can be used by artificial intelligence to automatically create tests. While big data is becoming more and more common, it is still facing many problems as well as questions.

###Flaws with Big Data
One of the most obvious problems with big data is the storage. Being called big data implies that there is a whole lot of data. According to an article by the TechStartup team, they write, “We produce 2.5 quintillion bytes of data created each day at our current rate. What’s even mind boggling is that, 90% of the data in the world today has been created in the last two years alone” (TechStartup Team, 2018). This is a huge problem, and while storage is getting cheaper and cheaper, the amount of data that is being produced is even larger. It is expensive to store large amounts of data and until it gets cheaper, big data might not reach its full potential. A second problem that big data is facing that is related to storage is the safety of this information. In an article by Yuvrajsinh Vaghela, he describes the problem as “A lot of organizations claim that they face trouble with Data Security. This happens to be a bigger challenge for them than many other data-related problems. The data that comes into enterprises is made available from a wide range of sources, some of which cannot be trusted to be secure and compliant within organizational standards” (Vaghela, 2018). As data is collected from many different places, who is to say what is fact, and what is made up. If a company struggles with data security and they lose control of said data, they could be in a world of hurt as this information becomes available to the public. One way this could be solved is by having people that understand big data and can protect it. But this is a problem of its own. In the same article written by Vaghela, he writes, “There is a definite shortage of skilled Big Data professionals available at this time. This has been mentioned by many enterprises seeking to better utilize Big Data and build more effective Data Analysis systems” (Vaghela, 2018). This is a problem because it means there are jobs out there that are unfilled. It means that a company might be losing the opportunity to use big data in order to profit maximize or market more efficiently. One problem and a question many people have about big data and how it is used is how ethical is it? In order for big data to be viable, a large amount of data must be collected at a very fast pace. This means that any time a twitter post is liked, or a YouTube video is watched, it is tracked and stored. The next video clicked is similar the previous. The next post on twitter is a targeted ad based on previous likes. This background collection of data is what makes big data big data. But does that make it right? This is something that big data must overcome, prove that while it uses this background collection, to not abuse it.

###Conclusion
Big data has had a huge come up the last few years. As mentioned earlier, “90% of the data in the world today has been created in the last 2 years alone” (TechStartup Team, 2018). It can be described as very fast and very voluminous, taking up lots of space and very fast. It is transforming the way that industries look from the sports world all the way into education. But even as big data has made this huge leap over the last few years, the amount of people who understand and know how to properly analyze it has not kept up. The education system needs to put a heavier focus on trying to help everyone, not just people interested in big data and computers understand the uses and practicality of big data. This is data that is being collected from anywhere and everywhere. According to an article by Megan Ray Nichols, she writes about how big data has become a huge industry. She says, “Big data got so big because there’s a demand for consumer and voter information. In fact, it could be a $203 billion industry by 2020” (Nichols, 2018). It is worth so much because of the buying and selling of this big data between companies. While the 2020 projection is large, there is no telling how much the industry could be worth in the future as people are only going to produce more and more data.








###References
Ayers, R., Deen, K., & Tkatchuk, R. (2018, January 24). How Big Data Is Revolutionizing Sports. Retrieved November 26, 2019, from https://dataconomy.com/2018/01/big-data-revolutionizing-favorite-sports-teams/.
Ayers, R. (2018, September 6). How Big Data And Education Can Work Together To Help Students Thrive. Retrieved November 29, 2019, from https://www.smartdatacollective.com/how-big-data-and-education-can-work-together-help-students-thrive/.
How much data do we create every day? [Infographic]: Startups News: Tech News. (2018, May 21). Retrieved November 26, 2019, from https://techstartups.com/2018/05/21/how-much-data-do-we-create-every-day-infographic/.
Jones, L. (2019, May 15). What Is the Use of Big Data in Education? Retrieved November 28, 2019, from https://www.colocationamerica.com/blog/big-data-and-education.
Nichols, M. R. (2018, November 26). Big Data is so large, it's raising privacy & ethical issues - EuroScientist. Retrieved November 28, 2019, from https://www.euroscientist.com/big-data-ethical-issues/.
Ricky, A. (2019, January 31). How Data Analysis In Sports Is Changing The Game. Retrieved November 30, 2019, from https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2019/01/31/how-data-analysis-in-sports-is-changing-the-game/#65e575123f7b.
Vaghela, Y. (2018, June 28). Four Common Big Data Challenges. Retrieved November 26, 2019, from https://www.dataversity.net/four-common-big-data-challenges/#.
What Is Big Data? (n.d.). Retrieved November 24, 2019, from https://www.oracle.com/big-data/guide/what-is-big-data.html.




